---
title: Monads make sense
published: true
categories: coding concepts functional
---

Monads : Oh no! How scary!...or perhaps not
===========================================

This seems to be the go to joking reaction of most developers to someone
bringing up the topic of monads. And, to be honest, I can't blame them: most of
the _"easy"_ tutorials left me scratching my head in confusion about what
exactly a monad _was_.

A lot of effort gets made in explaining why monads are required for pure functional
programming a la Haskell but until recently I didn't feel that I really got what
monads _were_ as a concrete thing in a program. I could point to them and say
_"yup, sure looks like that's the monad bit there"_ but beyond that I was
stumped. So, after deciding to try the [write you a scheme](https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Write_Yourself_a_Scheme_in_48_Hours/)
tutorial out this weekend I braced myself for monads.

#### They came.

#### I saw.

#### It made sense...

I was surprised at how _much_ sense it made after the three or four muddled
attempts I'd made at using them before. I'd been able to write code but not
really understand what I was doing or - importantly - _why it was a better way
of doing things._ To explain my lightbulb moment I'm going to have a small go
at go for its error handling. (Pun intended)

If you've written any go at all you are likely familiar with the almost nursery
rhyme like error handling dance of _if err != nil_:

```go
result, err := some_function_that_can_fail()
if err != nil {
    // Handle the error and probably bail out of whatever you were doing
}
// Use the result now that we know there wasn't an error
```

It's not the _most_ horrible thing in the world but do this five or six times in
quick succession while you're writing the `init` function of a webserver and
you'll quickly feel the pain. My main complaint about this as an idiom is that
most of your functions end up being 50% error handling blocks with almost all of
the error handling taking the same form. As a programmer that should make you
reach for an abstraction; something to lift the error handling out of the way so
that you can get on with writing your lovely webserver.

## There must be a better way

For now lets avoid all the unique Haskell type signature notation (which may
actually be my _favourite_ thing about Haskell code: they are very satisfying to
write). Instead, we'll stick with go and see how far we can get. We'll start by
defining a result type to contain our value and our error. (For simplicity,
we'll assume that all of our functions return an int).

```go
type Result struct {
    value int
    error error
}
```

On its own this doesn't get us much but we'll rewrite our potentially failing
function to use it along with another function that we want to pass our result
on to:

```go
result1 := some_function_that_can_fail(42)

if result.error != nil {
    panic("The world is ending!")
}

result2 := some_other_function(result1.value)

if result.error != nil {
    panic("The world is ending slightly later than planned!")
}

fmt.Println(result2.value)
```

As you can imagine, this could go on for a while...

Let's add a method to our result type to capture this pattern of unpack, check
the error (bail if there is one), pass on the the next function in line:

```go
type resFunc func(int) Result

func (r Result) chain(f resFunc) Result {
    if r.error != nil {
        // Our function failed so don't call the next one
        return Result{ error: r.error }
    }
    return f(r.value)
}
```

With this under our belts we can simplify our original example!

```go
result := some_function_that_can_fail(42).chain(some_other_function)

if result.error != nil {
    fmt.Println("The world is ending!")
} else {
    fmt.Println(result.value)
}
```

Isn't that nicer? We still need one obligatory copy of the `if err != nil` dance
but that stays as one copy no matter how long our chain of function calls gets.
Pretty cool!

So, I hear you cry, when do we get to the Monad bit?


## Enter the Monad

That was it.

Seriously. The chain method on our `Result` type is Haskell's _bind_ operator
`>>=` in disguise. A flimsy and easy to see through disguise but hey!

In Haskell type signature notation bind looks like this:
```haskell
(>>=) :: Ma -> (a -> Mb) -> Mb
```

The `M`s are the monad part. (Don't close the tab!)

What this is saying is the following:

_"Take a value that is wrapped up in 'something', pull the value out, pass it on
to a function that expects that value and returns another 'something'"_

Sound familiar?

As my team lead put it when I had a crack at explaining this the other day,
_"what makes it a Monad? Why is this different from returning a struct in C that
has a return type and an error code"_. The answer? Pretty much nothing. The
whole idea is that composing functions is nice and simple:

```go
result := foo(bar(baz(x)))
```

So long as you pass the correct types to the next function in line everything
works. This falls apart when functions do _real things_ like hit the network, or
try to open a file. Now any function in our nice little chain can fail, so we
need to check that it's ok to continue and call the next function in line.

Monads are just a fancy term for _"writing your functions to use a rich common return
type that contains the extra information"_. Using our `chain` method, we can get
back to the same thing:

```go
result := foo(x).chain(bar).chain(baz)
```

A little more line noise but now that we are using the `chain` method to handle all
of our error handling, we can compose our functions again!


### So what's the catch?

Hopefully by now you'll be agreeing with me that Monads are pretty useful and
only marginally more confusing that normal code with explicit handling of
additional side effects from our functions.

So why aren't monads everywhere in every language?

In short, they're hard to enforce without a crazy type system like Haskell's.
Haskell allows you to define `typeclasses` (similar to an OO interface) on _type
constructors themselves_. This gives you a _lot_ more power but it is definitely
also a lot more confusing than regular OO style imperative programming.

You can write something to work like a Monad as we've done here but it is a one
shot thing that we need to reimplement for every equivalent `Return` type that
we want to use it for. It's not the end of the world, but it does place a
barrier to every day programmers defining all this extra machinary in every
project they start.

That said, you can find monads in disguise in other languages. Rust's `Option`
type has `bind` hidden in its interface as [and_then](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/option/enum.Option.html#method.and_then)
as do a number of other standard library types. You'll find a lot of libraries
for your language of choice that implement Monads in a very _Haskelly_ which -
in my opinion - isn't the right way to go. Stick with the idioms of the language
you're in and if they work - and in `go` I think they _do_ - give monads a try.

The code shown in this post can be found in a golang play session [here](https://play.golang.org/p/F-RQEA-8hl).
